>> Kyle Simpson: Another interesting
perspective on why functional programming.
And this is more from
the mathematical perspective.
Functional programming though
it looks very programming esque,
it looks like function calls,
it's actually math.
Now, I don't know the math.
And I would guess that at least some
of you don't know the math either.
But you know what, that's okay.
This isn't a math course,
I don't need to teach you the math for
you to benefit from it and here's why.
I'm sure all of you at some time or
another,
probably recently,
have eaten out in a restaurant.
And they brought you the bill and
you had to do some basic arithmetic to
figure what tip to add and how much you're
gonna charge on your credit card, okay?
Now, you probably learned,
most of these at least,
probably learned basic arithmetic back in
1st, 2nd, 3rd grade something like that.
And you've been using those
life skills ever since.
And I'm also willing to bet that
the vast majority if not all of you,
have never actually gone through
the formal proof of why 1 plus 1 equals 2.
You've never gone to that level of math.
Did you know that there's
an actual formal proof for it?
And did you know that it's amazingly
complex to prove that 1 plus 1 equals 2.
I can't even begin to explain the math
you of that, so I'm not even gonna try.
The point is that we're able to take
advantage of a mathematical principle
even if we can't prove it to ourselves.
We can add 1 plus 1 equals 2.
And guess what, we never ever
question 1 plus 1 equals 2, do we?
Is there ever been a time where you were
like, well, I added 10 and 9 together and
I got 19, but is it really 19?
I'm not sure, like, no, you just do it.
So when I tell you that functional
programming is based on mathematical
principles, you can rest on the fact
that if you do 1 plus 1 and
you get 2, that's the end of the story.
The math proves that whether you
can go through the formal proof or
not, is a secondary issue.
Functional programmers, by the way,
seem to get a particular joy in life from
going through the formal proofs and that's
totally okay, but it didn't work for me.
I should say, it has not yet
worked for me.
I'm not at the point of my journey yet,
where to learn a thing means that I need
to go learn some mathematical laws and
apply it, and do some notations and
some conversions of the equations.
That isn't how I learned this stuff.
And yet, I can still take advantage
of the fact that if I know
that this thing done this way,
has this result,
it's the same thing as relying
up on 1 plus 1 equals 2.
If I do it the right way,
I know what the end result's gonna be.
How many of you have ever written
a test in your program before?
Anybody done tests, probably a lot of
you do TDD, I know that's very popular.
TDD, where you write a test and
then you run some code and
you're hoping that it passes the test,
right?
Or maybe you do it the other way around,
you write some code and
then you write a test and
the test fails and now you're questioning,
is my test bad or is my code bad?
Not really sure, for
me, it's usually both.
But we're trying to get the test to run
and we're trying to get it to pass,
we want the green.
Somewhat universal experience for us.
Here's what happens for me and
maybe it happens for you.
I write some code and
then I go to run the test, I'm not really
sure whether it's gonna pass or not.
I think it will, I hope it will,
maybe, let's see.
Nope, it didn't pass, failed.
So, what do I do?
I go back and I wrap some parentheses
around something and I try it again.
No, didn't work,
okay then I add one to it.
Nope didn't work and I just keep fumbling
my way through because if I really
understood it in the first time that I did
it, the test would have passed, right?
So we are clearly into territory,
this gray area where most of
us spend most of our career.
We're in this gray area where we only
partially understand the problem we're
trying to solve, not zero.
You are a smart people,
you understand some of it.
You just don't understand enough of it,
cuz if you did understand all of it,
then it would pass the first time.
Unless you fat finger a typo or something.
But most of the time our bugs are like
logic bugs where we kind of understand
the problem domain, we kind of understand
the algorithm, but not entirely.
So we fumble our way toward it.
This is how I've done almost all of
my programming for 25 plus years, so
I fumble my way towards
something where the test passed.
And then I'm like thank God, and
then I move on to the next thing.
And it's this building and
building and building.
>> Kyle Simpson: Some of you are nodding
your heads like you can relate to that,
what would it be like?
What would it change in your programming,
in your profession,
in your day to day work?
If almost every time that
you went to run a test,
you were 100% certain of the outcome?
>> Kyle Simpson: What would that do for
you?
Would you spend less cycles trying to
fumble your way through figuring it out?
Maybe, hopefully.
>> Kyle Simpson: I'm not suggesting that
you would never run the test, but maybe
you'd run them less often because you
begin to develop a sense of confidence.
I know what I'm doing,
I'm not an imposter anymore.
When I do it, it does the right thing.
Maybe that you would make you
a more effective programmer.
>> Kyle Simpson: One of the reasons why
functional programming is compelling,
at least to me, is it offers the promise
that we can use principles of programming.
Not that somebody just wrote
about in a blog post or
gave a fancy conference talk about,
but it's based on real hard math.
And even if I don't understand the math,
I can trust the mathematicians.
>> Kyle Simpson: I'd like to
have more of my code like that.
I don't know about you, but I'd like to
have more of my code in that category of,
I guarantee you it's gonna do
the right thing every time.
If I use it correctly,
if I legitimately do one and one and
I get two, I don't have to
question that again, that's done.
And that would free up our attention,
I think,
to focus on the more important parts.
Those higher level important things,
those logic and
business domain questions that we
should be spending our time on.
It'd free us up for that and I think
that'd be a good thing if we could free
up our attention and
shift our attention to those things.
>> Kyle Simpson: So that's one of
the compelling reasons why functional
programming.
We know that these techniques
are not just a nicely designed API,
as a matter of fact some of them
are kinda weirdly designed.
They're not just about
a nice design of an API or
a clever name, they're about
using mathematical principles.
In a mathematically sound way that just
happens to look like programming, and
it happens to let us solve
programming problems.
>> Kyle Simpson: Ultimately,
what I'm getting at here,
I think this is the ultimate reason why.
So you have some people say, there's a lot
of different things that people will say
about what is the best code.
I would say that the best code is
the code that didn't have to be read.
And that might sound a little strange
to you, but let me explain it this way.
There's a code base that
has 10,000 lines of code.
What if 9900 lines of that code was based
upon proven mathematical principles and
I didn't ever have to second
guess any of that stuff.
And there were just 100
lines of business logic code
that I spent all day
every day thinking about.
Would that code base be more effective for
me to manage?
Would it be easier for
me to find and fix bugs,
if I reduce the surface area
of what I needed to focus on?
I think that's one of the reasons why
functional programming is compelling.
I hope these ideas are gonna help you when
you have that inevitable conversation with
the other people that you code with.
People you work with on open-source
projects or people that you work with at
your job, people you work with in
your class if you are in school.
You're gonna have to ask them
to come on the journey as well.
You gonna have to convince them to
come on the journey as well and
those are some reasons
why functional program.